---
layout: post
title: "Notes on GNN"
date: 2023-1-23 +0300
type: "blog"
---

## Graph Representation 
- adjacency matrix
- adjacency list (I saw different definitions)
  - element being a list of the neighboring nodes of a node (This one from data structure course...)
  - element being a list of the ending nodes of an edge[^GNNintro]

## Scheme
input: graph, vertex feature, edge feature




**Message passing**
- feature transform + aggregation [^MessagePassing]
- Different schemes
  - Convolutional: spectral filtering on graph
    - non-parametric filter
      - non-localized in real space
      - computationally expensive
    - polynomial parametric filter [^SpectralFilter]
      - localized in real space
  - Attentional

**Pooling**

### Graph Convolutional Networks

**Laplacian Operator**: $L = D - A$ where $D$ is the degree diagonal matrix and $A$ is the adjacency matrix

**Fourier Transform**: defined as a basis transformation onto the *eigenvalues of Laplacian operator*
- $L$ is real symmetric, and thus the eigenvectors are orthonormal



## Permutation
The permutation of a vector can be represented by a matrix

$$
P_{(x_1, x_2, x_3)}
= 
\begin{pmatrix}
    \delta_{x_{1},1} & \delta_{x_{2},1} & \delta_{x_{3},1} \\
    \delta_{x_{1},2} & \delta_{x_{2},2} & \delta_{x_{3},2} \\
    \delta_{x_{1},3} & \delta_{x_{2},3} & \delta_{x_{3},3}
\end{pmatrix},
$$

where $PP^T=I$ obviously holds because $\delta_{x_{k}, i}\delta_{x_{k}, j} = \delta_{x_k,x_k}\delta_{i,j} = \delta_{i,j}$.

On a graph, applying permutation to the adjacency matrix is $PAP^T$

**Permutation invariance**
- $f(\vec{x}) = f(P\vec{x})$


**Permutation equivariance**[^GNNWed]
- $Pf(\vec{x}) = f(P\vec{x})$
  > if we permute the nodes, it doesn’t matter if we do it before or after the function!
- So the dimension of the domain and codomain of $f$ should be the same?




## Smoothing
In message-passing schemes, a node gathers information from its neighbors and combine their features into its own to update. This process leads to neighboring nodes have similar representations. It is undesired when we are, say, to classify the nodes if all of them are somehow homogeneous.

**Quantification**[^GNNBlog1]
- MAD and MADGap
- Group Distance Ratio

**Regularization**


**To be continued**

[^GNNintro]: https://distill.pub/2021/gnn-intro/
[^GNNWed]: https://petar-v.com/talks/GNN-Wednesday.pdf
[^GNNBlog1]: https://towardsdatascience.com/over-smoothing-issue-in-graph-neural-network-bddc8fbc2472
[^SemiSupervised]: Kipf, T. N. and Welling, M. Semi-Supervised Classification with Graph Convolutional Networks. ArXiv eprints, September 2016.
[^SpectralFilter]: Defferrard, M., Bresson, X., and Vandergheynst, P. Convolutional neural networks on graphs with fast localized spectral filtering. In Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 3844–3852, 2016.
[^MessagePassing]: Gilmer, J., Schoenholz, S. S., Riley, P. F., Vinyals, O., and Dahl, G. E. Neural message passing for quantum chemistry. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1263–1272. PMLR, 2017.
